## Cryptography

**Cryptography** is the practice of designing mathematical algorithms and protocols 
to secure information and communications against adversaries.

**Protocols** are sets of rules or procedures that one or more entities follow to 
achieve a specific goal. 

**Primitives** are the fundamental building blocks of cryptography, often used with 
other primitives to form a cryptographic algorithm or protocol.

**Constructions** are the methods or processes used for building cryptographic 
objects (e.g., algorithms, protocols) from primitives.

---

## Symmetric Cryptography

Class of cryptographic algorithms which requires the sharing of a **secret key**. 

**Symmetric encryption** uses a single, shared, secret key for both encryption 
and decryption of data. 

Encryption takes **plaintext** data and a secret key, and produces **ciphertext**, 
data that is unintelligible without the key. Decryption does the inverse, taking the 
same secret key and ciphertext to recover the original plaintext. 

### AES

**Advanced Encryption Standard** is an instance of a symmetric encryption algorithm 
(cryptographic primitive).

---

## Asymmetric Cryptography

Due to the difficulty in implementing secure **key distribution** for symmetric
cryptography, another useful class of cryptographic algorithms emerged, 
**asymmetric (public key) cryptography**.

Makes use of different keys for different functions rather than a single, shared
key.

**Asymmetric encryption** uses a **public key** and **private key** pair; anyone 
can encrypt data with the public key but only the owner of the associated private 
key can decrypt that data.

### Diffie-Hellman (DH)

Instance of an asymmetric cryptographic primitive, used for **key exchange**.

Key exchange algorithms establish a common secret between two parties, which can be
used for different purposes (e.g., key to symmetric encryption primitive). 

Each party first agrees to a common public set of parameters, then generate their 
own **private keys** (never shared). Each private key is combined with the common 
parameters to produce **public keys** (always shared). Public keys are then 
exchanged, allowing for each party to combine the others public key with their 
private key to produce the final shared secret.

This protocol is vulnerable to a **man-in-the-middle (MITM)** attack. Each party 
accepts any public key received as being generated by the other, without 
verification.

### RSA

Algorithm named after Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman (RSA).

Consists of two different primitives: public key encryption algorithm 
(**asymmetric encryption**) and a (digital) signature scheme.

---

## Digital Signatures

Cryptographic primitive used to ensure the integrity and authenticity of data, 
and to provide **non-repudiation** in communication between parties.

Messages are **signed** using a private key to generate a **signature**. Any party
can then verify the message by combining it with the signature and the associated 
public key. If the signature is valid, the message has authenticity, integrity, and 
non-repudiation.

---

## Kerckhoffs’s Principle

A cryptographic algorithm/protocol must be secure without relying on the secrecy 
of the implementation (key always remains secret). Security through obscurity, 
however, relies on hiding system details in order to remain secure, but provides 
no mathematical guarantees of security or ability to robustly audit and test.

---

## Hash Functions

Function which transforms input data to a fixed-length unique sequence of bytes 
(`digest`). The same input produces the same fixed-length sequence of bytes.

Provides partial integrity and authenticity for data communicated between parties: 
comparing the computed digest to that which is shared by the other party can ensure 
the data received was indeed the data expected. Receiver must trust that the 
provided digest for comparison is authentic through the trust mechanism used to 
receive the data and digest (e.g., `HTTPS`).

**Second pre-image resistance** property of the hash function ensures the digest 
corresponding to some data is unique and no other data can produce the same digest.

Hash functions in cryptography provide mainly three security properties:

- **Pre-image resistance**: Input cannot be derived from the digest alone, given
  a sufficiently large input space

- **Second pre-image resistance**: Digest derived from some input cannot be produced 
  through hashing a different input (one input is fixed)

- **Collision Resistance**: Guarantee that two different inputs cannot be hashed
  to produce the same digest (both inputs are unfixed)


### SHA-2

**Secure Hash Algorithm** (`SHA-2`) is the most widely adopted hash function, 
providing four versions which differ on output space; 224, 256, 384, and 512 bits.

`SHA-512/224` and `SHA-512/256` version are derived from truncating the result of 
SHA-512.

**Compression function** accepts two input arguments of length X and Y, and return 
an output of length X or Y. 

**Davies-Meyer** method is used as the compression algorithm by SHA-2 which relies 
on a **block cipher** (cipher that encrypts a fixed-size block of data). The first 
input (block) is used as the key to a block cipher. The second input (intermediate) 
is data to be encrypted by the block cipher. The output block is the result of 
XORing the intermediate with the output of the block cipher.

Employs the **Merkle-Damgard** construction: hashes the data by iteratively
invoking the compression function. Padding is added to the input before being 
chunked into block-sizes supported by the compression algorithm (e.g., `SHA-256` 
requires a block size of 512-bits). The compression function is then iteratively 
applied to the blocks, with its previous output used as the second argument. 
The initial second argument is usually fixed and standardized.

Vulnerable to a **length-extension attack** if used to hash secrets.


### SHA-3

**Secure Hash Algorithm** (`SHA-3`) was standardized due to the breaking of `MD5`
and `SHA-1`, which both used the **Merkle-Damgard** construction, as well as SHA-2s 
vulnerability to length-extension attacks.

In addition to the security properties provided by cryptographic hash functions and
the security properties of SHA-2, SHA-3 is also able to hash secrets. Provides the 
same variants of SHA-2, with a different naming scheme.

Uses the **sponge** construction, built on top of the `keccak-f` **permutation**: 
function that maps an input to an output of the same size (unique and reversible).

Input must be arbitrarily divided into a **rate** and **capacity**. Capacity is 
intended to be treated like a secret (larger = more secure). The input is XORed with 
the rate of the permutation input (initially 0-bits). Input can be padded to evenly 
divide into rate-sized blocks. Permutation is called iteratively while XORing each 
block with the input of a permutation and permuting the **state** (intermediate 
output from previous operation) after each block is XORed. Ingesting the input is
referred to as **absorbing** and producing the digest is called **squeezing**.

---
